economic forces play a great role in shaping any
community. How would you say that economic
influence has been an impact in planning in
Austin? Austin's been very fortunate, as I think
you'll find most centers of government. With the
high percentage of government employment,
Austin's been immune from the business cycle.
Recessions don't tend to hit Austin.
Unemployment doesn't tend to hit Austin. We've
always had one of the lowest unemployment in the
entire state, if not the nation. For a city in the
size category. Well, for any city, really. For any
city. I think it's characteristic of most centers
of government.
So Austin has not been diversified. It's been made
up of three sectors, government, military, which
is not a tremendous amount, but it's significant,
and the city of Austin. The city of Austin is one of
the largest employers in the entire area.
Primarily because they own the utility system,
there's over 8,000 employees in the city of
Austin. It's been in the past five years, or maybe
since the beginning of the Austin Memorial
Program in the early 70s, that the Chamber of
Commerce began a very strong and well-financed
operation to diversify Austin's economy. That
has resulted over the past three years with a very
noticeable and predictable shift of electronics
manufacturing from Silicon Valley in California
near San Francisco. Firms are coming to Austin to
establish new plants. There's very good reasons
why they're doing that. They find that in
California they're robbing from each other now
for the talent pool. And here's Austin with a huge
university, a tremendously good environment,
and a new opportunity. Well IBM came, Texas
Instruments came, Now we find Data General
Corporation coming. We find three or four other
computer firms moving in from Silicon Valley and
other parts of the country. And we see Austin's
electronic manufacturing employment
skyrocketing. As an example, five years ago,
there might have been two lines of advertising for
electrical engineering people semiconductor
people. Now there's two pages of them. And
Austin's headed down the same road as Silicon
Valley. There will be a saturation, in my view, in
the next ten years of electronics firms. As a
result, Austin is liable to face the same kind of
activity that Silicon Valley had. A tremendous
competition for labor, increased labor costs,
and of course with that will come greater
in-migration more white collar and higher
educated people and you will see Austin continue
to attract the white collar, high income pool of
people. Where has that type of so-called clean
industry been sown in Austin? Anywhere they want.
Anywhere they want. Undeveloped land usually or
has land been cleared, let's say slum clearance?
No, there's been no clearance. There has been no
centralization either. IBM is just going through
a doubling in the size of its plant. Texas
Instruments, about 8, 9, 10 miles away, outside
the city limits, was only annexed a few years ago.
There's two large firms in the south just coming
in. There's one in the west. Motorola has its
second plant location. It has a large
semiconductor facility on the east side. Tracor
Corporation, which is a large electronics
manufacturer, is on the east side. And so they're
just ringing the city. There has not been a
dedicated interest because of the price of cheap
land. And the availability of land, there's not
been any interest in coming in and going to the
expense of clearing and going into an inner city.
Mobility is easy in Austin. It doesn't take very
long to get north, south, east, or west. And so they
choose the cheapest alternative that they can. Do
planners receive a great deal of problems,
though, in that type of sphere where industry is
more or less encircled with city and
transportation needs have to be taken care of, new
residential patterns are established. How are
these planned for? I'd say right now, from my
knowledge, they're not being planned for.
They're accepted. The city of Austin many years
ago began the development of ring freeways. and
though citizens have expressed opposition to
that, we find that a significant highway's been
built right through the hill country,
significant bridge is going to be built right over
the lake that was not really beneficial. No one
wanted it to happen, but the state did it anyway.
Tremendous conflicts there. I see Austin
continuing down the road of an inner loop, and then
an outer loop, virtually the same shape that
American cities have taken all over the country.
We've almost completed the inner loop. We've
already seen plans for an outer loop. And though
there's none under construction, we now have
freeway presentations and freeway proposals
being looked at for other arteries of this
community. And I think that runs counter to the
master plan. But yet, everything continues in
spite of that. It also seems to run counter to the
master plan that growth is to be managed, but at the
same time, clean industries are courted without
real regard for the consequences of their
relocation in the Austin area. Is that a
significant problem? Yes, and it's significant
from two points. One is that the city planning
department is not involved in planning for the
economic growth of this community. That's not a
role that they've had. the Chamber of Commerce,
through its economic development activities,
has been the recruiter, will remain the
recruiter, and goes out and gets these people,
then the issue before the planning department has
characteristically been, is this appropriate
land use, and can we serve it with utilities? If the
answer is yes, they go there. So, it's reactive.
It's reactive planning, and that's what's
unfortunate about Austin. We find ourselves
looking down the road in a master plan, but
because, as I view it, it's vague, we are
constantly reacting to what industry wants to go
where. We don't have a land use map of saying, no,
you can only go here. Changes have occurred in the
master plan, in the maps, and in zoning to
accommodate those industries. As a result of
their relocation. As a result of their proposal to
come to the city, having been recruited by the
Chamber of Commerce. How about the role of heavy
industry as part of the economic base there? They
have not come to Austin because the Chamber of
Commerce has determined, and they will tell you,
we're members of the Chamber. To the extent that
Austin is Austin and we want to keep it that way, the
Chamber of Commerce has taken the role that they
should bring new jobs for the expanding
population. They don't want heavy industry, and
the city doesn't want heavy industry. So as a
result, heavy industry doesn't come here because
they won't recruit them. They do feel their
responsibility is to Central Texas more than it is
to the city of Austin because the Travis County
people do not believe in growth control. And we are
seeing plants built north of the city outside the
city limits in Round Rock and in areas north of
there because this is a regional question and not
In that regard, in planning, there has not been an
agreement at the Capital Area Planning Council
who may have a responsibility to look at the
regional aspects of growth and the regional
aspects of development. There has not been, to my
knowledge, any dialogue that would come up with an
agreed-upon plan for the regional development of
this area of the state. As a result, everybody's
out fighting each other. With the... With these
incoming electronic industries, with the great
number of governmental employees that are in the
Austin area, I would imagine that the average
income level is higher than it would be for most
other Texas cities. Is that the case? And how does
the income level of the residents relate to
planning decisions? Well, I'm not sure what you
could say about the average income of Austin. It's
difficult to compare it with Houston. It's higher
than San Antonio. Houston and Dallas I'm not sure
of. Other cities of half a million, Fort Worth or
so, I'm not sure of that either. The relative
wealth of the community is important in Austin
because that determines where federal funds are
to be spent. And that is very closely watched. But
as far as the average income of Austin being higher
than than other comparable cities. I don't think
that's the case, but I don't know. University
professors aren't paid all that much. There's a
lot of them. State employees, I don't know, the top
salary may be $40,000 a year. That's not
significant. But having so many people that...
There aren't many in that level, though. There
aren't very many in the $40,000 level, but I don't
know. It's not like being in Dallas and having
insurance and banking executives making
hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Have there been problems in the past as far as
federal grants programs and minority groups and
getting their acceptance of these programs in
their areas? There's been problems with one, but
beyond that there's been a general problem, and it
relates to income. The city does not have a, is not
considered a distressed city. It doesn't fall
into a Laredo category or a San Antonio category.
There is not a tremendously widespread incidence
of poverty. There are a lot of poor people, but
there are a lot of people who are not poor. And so
Austin's problem has been one that many of the
federal programs designed to help those who need
help, and we have a significant number, are not
eligible for Austin to apply for because we do not
have sufficient poverty, we do not have
sufficient decay to meet the criteria. Austin has
forever fought that. To say that we have 25,000
people who are poor, and just because we don't have
56,000, which was 30% of the population or so, we
shouldn't be singled out and not allowed to get
those benefits. And we've fought forever to do
that. Austin has had a great history of
participation in federal programs. The only one
that I'm aware of that was defeated by the
reluctance or opposition of minority groups has
been the overall economic development plan,
which involved EDA funds that would have allowed
planning and public works funds. The suspicion
was that this was a program to build downtown at the
expense of the poor. The poor would be used as an
excuse to gain eligibility. But once that
eligibility was granted, It was a mistrust that
the council would actually use the funds for their
benefit.
We'll never know if that was valid because as a
result of their opposition, the council voted not
to pursue the matter. And so after about a year, the
minority groups indicated that they felt they
were being used and didn't want to be done that way
unless there was some guarantees they could
control the program. The council said that they
didn't feel that was an appropriate role. And so
they decided not to submit the application. And as
a result, the groups that were intended to be
benefited suffered. I believe so. I know that at
least $200,000 in federal planning assistance
for economic development did not come to this
city, of which advance approval had already been
granted. And that occurred when?
1978. 1978. January 1978.
Is there anything else that you think is
significant as regards Austin and planning and
elements in its history that have affected
planning here? I think there are issues right now
before the city that the citizens and the
commissions refuse to acknowledge or fail to
understand. The community in its master plan has
determined that it should be a compact city to
avoid the problems of sprawl and to encourage and
protect its inner city neighborhoods and the
residential quality of the city. That means
you've got to have higher densities in a compact
city, and you've got to accommodate growth
corridors, and you've got to take care of mass
transit. It's the only way to avoid sprawl. But
while they say that, on one hand, they have
repeatedly voted to prohibit increased
densities in the inner city and to attempt to limit
heights and densities of developments. And the
two are violently and totally opposite. It sounds
like irreconcilable differences in a divorce
contest. Very similar. And unfortunately, what
has occurred from that is while those loggerheads
have existed, the community wants integrity.
compact growth they want managed growth but they
don't want any higher densities as a result of that
major new developments are occurring four five
six miles from the city center in the southwestern
part of the city a very sensitive area a giant mall
three malls announced within a mile of each other
huge office centers being proposed high density
apartments being built the same in the northwest
community and i believe that as uh As should be
learned, if one were to look at Houston with a high
density core and then other nodes of high
densities, Austin is heading right down the same
line and has yet to recognize that. As far as
problems between planning for Travis County and
planning for Austin City, are there significant,
you mentioned earlier, that Travis County is more
growth-oriented. They're not concerned
particularly with growth management. They want
more population. Has that come into conflict with
the goals of Austin City on occasion? Yes, it has.
The county has not established a formal planning
department program. They've had people who've
carried out that responsibility from time to
time. But the county has been in conflict with the
city on occasion primarily in regards to its
transportation programs. Where the new highways
are going, should freeways be built, and where are
those freeways? The county has supported those
while the city has expressed reservations and
concern. Those have been resolved sometimes in
split votes and other activities at the Austin
Transportation Study Level, which is the
Metropolitan Planning Organization for
Transportation. City planning doesn't play a
direct role in that either. That has been a
transportation role directed by the
Transportation Department of the city, and there
have been many, many conflicts. Have there been
occasions for joint Austin City and Travis County
Planning Commission meetings to decide this type
of area-wide problem? There's no planning
commission in Travis County. Oh, I'm sorry,
there's no commission. No, the only thing they
have is the Travis County Commissioner's Court.
There has never been, to my knowledge, any joint
meeting with the planning commission. There has
been only on occasion informal meetings between
the county commissioners and the city council. So
needs and goals don't exist in the county. Don't
exist. And that often comes in direct conflict
with what Austin City has envisioned and planned
for. Yeah, let me give you a very concrete example.
During the Jeff Friedman Council there was a long
discussion about Mopac Boulevard from its
northern well from its point of town lake south
through the Martin Creek area, a very
environmentally sensitive area. The city's
position was that the thing should be built with
limited access and no frontage roads so that it did
not encourage growth along the corridor and would
therefore be just a transportation link and
absolutely nothing else like a parkway through a
park. It was outside the city limits so the city
could not exercise any kind of direct controls.
The county, however, agreed with the
construction of the highway as it would normally
be, frontage roads, bridges, and all that. Since
the county was purchasing the right-of-way, they
were the ones who were the deciding issue. As a
result, the highway is now built, will almost be
open in the next few months or so. We'll have
frontage roads, exit ramps, all of the things that
will lead to a further densification of the area.
And that was a direct conflict. beyond the city of
Austin's control because it was outside the city
limits and totally under the discretion of the
county, who had other constituents, had
industries, had other activities that said, we
need that highway. And it was done that way. The
same thing's occurring in far west Travis County
as future planning is taking place for new loop
freeways. The city of Austin has not supported
those, has not even voted on them. Yet the planning
continues in spite of the master plan that says do
not grow into the western part of the county.
Well, thank you very much for your time, and I
appreciate your opinions on this. Good. The
information you've given us. You're welcome.